Cougar

The cougar (Puma concolor) is a large cat native to the Americas. Its range spans from the
        Canadian Yukon to the southern Andes in South America and is the most widespread of any large wild terrestrial
        mammal in the Western Hemisphere. It is an adaptable, generalist species, occurring in most American habitat
        types. This wide range has brought it many common names, including puma, mountain lion, catamount and panther
        (for the Florida sub-population). It is the second-largest cat in the New World, after the jaguar (Panthera
        onca). Secretive and largely solitary by nature, the cougar is properly considered both nocturnal and
        crepuscular, although daytime sightings do occur. Despite its size, the cougar is more closely related to
        smaller felines, including the domestic cat (Felis catus) than to any species of the subfamily Pantherinae.

The cougar is an ambush predator that pursues a wide variety of prey. Primary food sources are ungulates,
        particularly deer, but it also hunts smaller prey such as rodents. It prefers habitats with dense underbrush and
        rocky areas for stalking, but also lives in open areas. Cougars are territorial and live at low population
        densities. Individual home ranges depend on terrain, vegetation and abundance of prey. While large, it is not
        always the apex predator in its range, yielding prey it has killed to American black bears, grizzly bears and
        packs of wolves. It is reclusive and mostly avoids people. Fatal attacks on humans are rare, but increased in
        North America as more people entered cougar habitat and built farms.

Naming and etymology

The word cougar is borrowed from the Portuguese çuçuarana, via French; it was originally derived from the Tupi
        language. A current form in Brazil is suçuarana.[3] In the 17th century, Georg Marcgrave named it cuguacu ara.
        Marcgrave's rendering was reproduced in 1648 by his associate Willem Piso. Cuguacu ara was then adopted by John
        Ray in 1693.[4] In 1774, Georges-Louis Leclerc, Comte de Buffon converted cuguacu ara to cuguar, which was later
        modified to "cougar" in English.[5][6]

Behavior and ecology

Hunting and diet

The cougar is a generalist, hypercarnivore. They prefer large mammals such as mule deer, white-tailed deer, elk,
        moose, mountain goat and bighorn sheep. They will opportunistically take smaller prey such as rodents,
        lagomorphs, smaller carnivores, birds and even domestic animals including pets.[48] The mean weight of cougar
        vertebrate prey increases with its body weight and is lower in areas closer to the equator. A survey of North
        America research found 68% of prey items were ungulates, especially deer. Only the Florida panther showed
        variation, often preferring feral hogs and armadillos.[32]

Interactions with other predators

Aside from humans, no species preys upon mature cougars in the wild, although conflicts with other predators or
        scavengers occur. Of the large predators in Yellowstone National Park – the grizzly bear, the black bear, the
        gray wolf, and the cougar – the massive grizzly bear appears dominant, often (but not always) able to drive a
        gray wolf pack, an American black bear, and a cougar off their kills. One study found that grizzlies and
        American black bears visited 24% of cougar kills in Yellowstone and Glacier National Parks, usurping 10% of
        carcasses. Bears gained up to 113% and cougars lost up to 26% of their respective daily energy requirements from
        these encounters.[55] In Colorado and California, American black bears were found to visit 48% and 77% of kills,
        respectively. In general, cougars are subordinate to American black bears when it comes to kills and when bears
        are most active, the cats take prey more frequently and spend less time feeding on each kill. Unlike several
        subordinate predators from other ecosystems, cougars do not appear to take advantage of spatial or temporal
        refuges to avoid their competitors.[56][57]

Relationships with humans

Attacks on humans

In North America

Due to the expanding human population, cougar ranges increasingly overlap with areas inhabited by humans. Attacks
        on humans are very rare, as cougar prey recognition is a learned behavior and they do not generally recognize
        humans as prey.[85] In a 10-year study in New Mexico of wild cougars who were not habituated to humans, the
        animals did not exhibit threatening behavior to researchers who approached closely (median distance=18.5 m; 61
        feet) except in 6% of cases; 14/16 of those were females with cubs.[86] Attacks on people, livestock, and pets
        may occur when a puma habituates to humans or is in a condition of severe starvation. Attacks are most frequent
        during late spring and summer, when juvenile cougars leave their mothers and search for new territory.[87]

In South America

Pumas in the southern cone of America – often called Argentine cougars by North Americans – are reputed to be
        extremely reluctant to attack man; in legend, they defended people against jaguars.[97] The nineteenth century
        naturalists Félix de Azara[98] and William Henry Hudson[99] thought that attacks on people, even children or
        sleeping adults, did not happen. Hudson, citing anecdotal evidence from hunters, claimed that pumas were
        positively inhibited from attacking people, even in self-defense. In fact, attacks on humans, although
        exceedingly rare, have occurred

Predation on domestic animals

During the early years of ranching, cougars were considered on par with wolves in destructiveness. According to
        figures in Texas in 1990, 86 calves (0.0006% of Texas' 13.4 million cattle and calves), 253 mohair goats, 302
        mohair kids, 445 sheep (0.02% of Texas' 2 million sheep and lambs) and 562 lambs (0.04% of Texas' 1.2 million
        lambs) were confirmed to have been killed by cougars that year.[109][110] In Nevada in 1992, cougars were
        confirmed to have killed nine calves, one horse, four foals, five goats, 318 sheep, and 400 lambs. In both
        reports, sheep were the most frequently attacked. Some instances of surplus killing have resulted in the deaths
        of 20 sheep in one attack.[111] A cougar's killing bite is applied to the back of the neck, head, or throat and
        the cat inflicts puncture marks with its claws usually seen on the sides and underside of the prey, sometimes
        also shredding the prey as it holds on. Coyotes also typically bite the throat, but the work of a cougar is
        generally clean, while bites inflicted by coyotes and dogs leave ragged edges. The size of the tooth puncture
        marks also helps distinguish kills made by cougars from those made by smaller predators.
